Enrich document with using getter function over state struct instance (#15526)
ethereum/solidity: docs/contracts/visibility-and-getters.rst

        }
    }

> Getter functions do not always return the entire state variable,
> arrays and structs are two exceptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When considering arrays and structs, the getter functions do not return
the entire state variable, but a tuple of one or more elements.
```

If you have a ``public`` state variable of array type, then you can only retrieve
single elements of the array via the generated getter function. This mechanism
exists to avoid high gas costs when returning an entire array.

> When you declare a public state variable of a struct type,
> the generated getter function does not return the struct as a single object in memory.
> Instead, due to historical design choices and early limitations in the ABI encoding of structs,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you declare a public state variable of a struct type,
```

Reviewer: I think it is better to be more concise here.

the getter function returns the individual members of the struct as separate elements within a tuple.

> If the struct contains multiple members, the getter function returns a tuple with each member as a
> distinct element. Conversely, if the struct has only one member, the getter function simply returns
> that member directly instead of wrapping it in a tuple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the struct has only one member, the getter function returns that member's value.
```

The suggested removed phrase is redundant.

Also, I think that technically it still returns a unitary tuple, which in the end is evaluated/considered the same as the "unwrapped" single value.

Reviewer: Also, the text here is not entirely correct. There are cases where the struct members can be omitted.

        }
    }

> When considering arrays, mapping, and structs, the getter functions do not return
> the entire state variable.

Reviewer 2: I originally suggested to make things more concise here and merge the examples into one. I think things were going in that direction, but looking at the PR now, it seems that we went full circle and still ended up with multiple examples again :)

So a new suggestion: let's put everything starting from this place into a new subsection called `Getters for Complex Types`. That will at least separate these details from the main description of getters.

Then I'd expand this bit into an intro paragraph, along these lines:
```suggestion
Returning the entire data structure from a getter function in one go can be very expensive and in case of mappings outright impossible.
For this reason the return type of a getter will sometimes differ from the type of the state variable.
The general rule is that getters for arrays and mappings will return only one element at a time and certain fields can be omitted from structs.
This section will explain those rules in more detail.

Note that this mechanism is not meant to prevent the contract from returning the whole value, but simply to make
the default way to do this more aligned with best practices.
There are situations where returning the original type is perfectly acceptable and it can be easily achieved
by manually defining an external function that returns it.
```

        }
    }

When considering arrays and structs, the getter functions do not return
the entire state variable, but a tuple of one or more elements.

If you have a ``public`` state variable of array type, then you can only retrieve
single elements of the array via the generated getter function. This mechanism
exists to avoid high gas costs when returning an entire array.

When you declare a public state variable of a struct type, the generated getter function
returns specific member of the struct as separate elements within a tuple,
rather than the struct as a single object in memory.
The members returned appear in the order they are declared in the struct, provided they
are not omitted. Array-type members within the struct are excluded from the returned tuple.

> Additionally, if the struct consists solely of array-type members, no getter function will be generated

Reviewer: Not only arrays but also mappings don't have a getter generated (in this case) because as explained in the "Complex Example": 
```there is no good way to select individual struct members or provide a key for the mapping```

Also, I guess that in the above quote, it was meant to be `array members` instead of `struct members` originally.

Author: have changed it

Reviewer: > Also, I guess that in the above quote, it was meant to be `array members` instead of `struct members` originally.

Can someone else check and see if they interpret it the same way I did? @r0qs @nikola-matic @clonker

        }
    }

If you have a ``public`` state variable of mapping type. The getter function
returns the value associated with the key passed as an argument.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.16 <0.9.0;

    contract MappingExample {
        // public state variable
        mapping(uint => uint) public myMap;

        // Getter function generated by the compiler
        /*
        function myMap(uint i) public view returns (uint) {
            return myMap[i];
        }
        */
    }

When you declare a public state variable of a struct type, the generated getter function

> returns specific member of the struct as separate elements within a tuple,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
returns each member of the struct as separate elements within a tuple,
```

Author: changed

rather than the struct as a single object in memory.
The members returned appear in the order they are declared in the struct, provided they
are not omitted. Array members and mapping members within the struct are excluded from the returned tuple.
Additionally, if the struct consists solely of array members and mapping members, no getter function will be generated.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.16 <0.9.0;

    contract StructExample {
        // Struct Definition with single member
        struct SimpleStruct {
            int[2] arr;
            mapping(uint => uint) map;
        }

        // Struct Definition with multiple members
        struct ComplexStruct {
            uint a;
            bytes3 b;
            mapping(uint => uint) map;
            uint[3] c;
            uint[] d;
            bytes e;
        }

        // public state variables
        // SimpleStruct omits all its members, therefore its public instance is disallowed
        ComplexStruct public complexStruct;
        mapping(uint => mapping(bool => ComplexStruct[])) public map;

>         // Getter function generated by the compiler

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to keep the explanation from before (with the correction i suggested in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/15526#discussion_r1821076203): 
```
The mapping and arrays (with the exception of byte arrays)
in the struct are omitted because there is no good way to
select individual array members or provide a key for the mapping
```

Author: have changed based on my understanding. plz check

        }
    }

If you have a ``public`` state variable of mapping type. The getter function
returns the value associated with the key passed as an argument.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.16 <0.9.0;

    contract MappingExample {
        // public state variable
        mapping(uint => uint) public myMap;

        // Getter function generated by the compiler
        /*
        function myMap(uint i) public view returns (uint) {
            return myMap[i];
        }
        */
    }

> When you declare a public state variable of a struct type, the generated getter function
> returns each member of the struct as separate elements within a tuple,
> rather than the struct as a single object in memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you declare a public state variable of a struct type, the generated getter function
returns members of the struct as separate elements within a tuple,
rather than the struct as a single object.
```

The members returned appear in the order they are declared in the struct, provided they
are not omitted. The mapping and arrays (with the exception of byte arrays)
in the struct are omitted because there is no good way to
select individual array members or provide a key for the mapping

> Additionally, if all struct members are omitted, no getter function will be generated.

Reviewer 2: We should clarify that this is a compilation error. The compiler won't just silently skip the getter.

in the struct are omitted because there is no good way to
select individual array members or provide a key for the mapping
Additionally, if all struct members are omitted, no getter function will be generated.

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.9.0;
    pragma solidity >=0.4.16 <0.9.0;

    contract Complex {
        struct Data {
    contract StructExample {
        // Struct Definition with single member
        struct SimpleStruct {
            int[2] arr;
            mapping(uint => uint) map;
        }

        // Struct Definition with multiple members
        struct ComplexStruct {
            uint a;
            bytes3 b;
            mapping(uint => uint) map;
            uint[3] c;
            uint[] d;
            bytes e;
        }

>         mapping(uint => mapping(bool => Data[])) public data;

Reviewer 2: Assuming the suggestions above are applied, I'd be fine with merging it, since it's already an improvement over what we had. But I also think the structure could be better and there a lot more details we could add.

As for the structure, I'd rather incorporate the relevant parts of the complex example into the respective types. For example we should show multi-dimensional arrays already in the initial array example.

As for missing details, I played with this a bit and I think this is a more complete list of corner cases here:
1. Internal types (e.g. internal function pointers)
    - Cannot be the return type (compilation error).
1. Arrays
    - `n`-dimensional array getters have `n` parameters.
    - `bytes` and `string` getters return the whole thing.
    - Elements cannot be of internal or recursive types (compilation error).
2. Mappings
    - Elements cannot be of internal or recursive types (compilation error).
3. Structs
    - Top-level struct gets unpacked into a tuple.
    - Fields of mapping types are omitted from the top-level struct.
        - But not omitted from nested structs (compilation error).
    - Fields of array types are omitted from the top-level struct.
        - But not omitted from nested structs (no error)
    - Fields of internal types are not omitted but cannot be returned (compilation error).
        - Unless they are elements of an array/mapping that would be omitted. Then they are omitted along with their container.
    - Fields of recursive types (e.g. a dynamic array or mapping with elements of that same struct type) are not omitted but cannot be returned (compilation error).
        - Unless they are elements of an array/mapping that would be omitted. TThen they are omitted along with their container.

*Note that an array/mapping/struct containing an internal/recursive type is itself considered internal/recursive*.

So my proposal would be to have one example for each of these four categories, showing both a simple case and the corner cases.

In any case, this PR has been stalled long enough so I won't block it if the above is not done, but that's basically how this section should look like in my opinion.

>         // Getter function generated by the compiler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Getter functions generated by the compiler
```

Now you can use ``getArray()`` to retrieve the entire array, instead of
``myArray(i)``, which returns a single element per call.

> When you have a public state variable of a struct type, calling the
> getter function will return either a tuple containing the struct's members
> (if there are multiple members) or just a single member
> (if the struct has only one member). For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When you have a public state variable of a struct type, calling the compiler
generated getter function will return either a tuple containing the struct's members
(if there are multiple members) or just a single member
(if the struct has only one member). For example:
```

> (if the struct has only one member). For example:

Reviewer 4: What about something like this? just to make it more clear of why this is currently in that way.

```suggestion
When you declare a public state variable of a struct type,
the generated getter function does not return the struct as a single object in memory.
Instead, due to historical design choices and early limitations in the ABI encoding of structs,
the getter function returns the individual members of the struct as separate elements within a tuple.

If the struct contains multiple members, the getter function returns a tuple with each member as a
distinct element. Conversely, if the struct has only one member, the getter function simply returns
that member directly instead of wrapping it in a tuple. For example:
```

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.9.0;

>     contract structExample {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    contract StructExample {
```

Same for the structs below - should start with a capital letter.

        // Struct Definition with single member
        struct simpleStruct {
            bool b;
        }

        // Struct Definition with multiple members

>         struct compleStruct {

Reviewer 3: Should be `ComplexStruct`, right?

            uint a;
            bool b;
        }

        // public state variables

>         simpleStruct public ss;
>         compleStruct public cs;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        SimpleStruct public simpleStruct;
        CompleStruct public compleStruct;
```

        }
    }

Now you can use ``getArray()`` to retrieve the entire array, instead of
``myArray(i)``, which returns a single element per call.

The next example is more complex:

.. code-block:: solidity

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.9.0;
    contract StructExample {
        // Struct Definition with single member
        struct SimpleStruct {
            int[2] arr;
        }

    contract Complex {
        struct Data {
        // Struct Definition with multiple members
        struct ComplexStruct {
            uint a;
            bytes3 b;
            mapping(uint => uint) map;
            uint[3] c;
            uint[] d;
            bytes e;
            bool b;
            int[2] arr;
        }
        mapping(uint => mapping(bool => Data[])) public data;
    }

It generates a function of the following form. The mapping and arrays (with the
exception of byte arrays) in the struct are omitted because there is no good way

> to select individual struct members or provide a key for the mapping:

Reviewer: I think this should stay.

Author: I have merged it with the `ComplexStruct`
